Add System Protection Peripherals for ADSP (#488)
analogdevicesinc/documentation: docs/products/adsp/smpu.rst

.. _adsp-smpu:

System Memory Protection Unit (SMPU)
====================================

The System Memory Protection Unit (SMPU) provides flexible protection of memory
regions against unauthorized read or write access. Think of it as a security
checkpoint for memory. This peripheral examines every memory transaction and
decides whether to allow or block it.

.. note::
   This guide applies to all ADSP-SC5xx processors. While the SMPU 
   functionality is consistent across processor families, the specific details vary:

   - Number and location of SMPU instances
   - System ID assignments for bus masters
   - Number of available protection regions

What Does the SMPU Do?
-------------------------

The SMPU protects specific regions of memory from being accessed by unauthorized

> bus masters (processor cores, DMA controllers, etc.). We can configure:

Reviewer: Are there other examples of "bust masters" than processor cores and DMA controllers?

- Which memory regions to protect
- Whether to protect reads, writes, or both
- Which bus masters are allowed to access each region
- Whether secure or non-secure transactions are permitted

Key Features
---------------

Multiple Protection Regions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Each SMPU instance can monitor up to 8 memory regions simultaneously. Each region

> can have its own size and protection settings.

Reviewer: These sections can probably be converted to bullet points since each has one sentence and one already has bullet points. That will shorten the "Key Features" section and should make it easy to parse quickly

Reviewer: And the order of key features doesn't match the section order below

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 20 60

   * - Instance
     - Location
     - What It Protects
   * - SMPU-CL2_0
     - L2 Core Port 0
     - L2 SRAM Banks 0-3, Boot ROM0
   * - SMPU-DL2_0
     - L2 DMA Port 0
     - L2 SRAM Banks 0-7, Boot ROM0-2
   * - SMPU-CL2_1
     - L2 Core Port 1
     - L2 SRAM Banks 4-7, Boot ROM1-2
   * - SMPU-DL2_1
     - L2 DMA Port 1
     - L2 SRAM Banks 0-7, Boot ROM0-2
   * - SMPU-CL2_2
     - L2 Core Port 2
     - L2 SRAM Banks 0-7, Boot ROM0-2
   * - SMPU-DMC0
     - DDR Controller
     - External DDR3 memory
   * - SMPU-SPI2
     - SPI/OSPI Flash
     - External flash memory
   * - SMPU-OTP
     - OTP Memory
     - One-time programmable memory

For SC57x/SC58x check the related Hardware Reference Manual to see SMPU instance table.

How It Works
---------------

The SMPU examines every memory transaction in this order:

1. Address Check - Does it fall within a protected region?
2. Operation Check - Is it a read or write?
3. Bus Master ID check - Which bus master is making the request?
4. Security Level Check - Is it a secure or non-secure transaction?
5. Decide - Pass the transaction, or return an error

> Basically, SMPU sits between bus masters and memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A SMPU sits between bus masters and memory.
```

Basic Configuration
----------------------

Protecting a Memory Region
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To protect a memory region, we need to configure several registers.

First, we should define the region to protect. This can be done by setting the
base address and size in ``SMPU_RADDR[n]`` and ``SMPU_RCTL[n]``.

Second, we need to configure the protection itself. After deciding whether we allow
read/write or both, we may set ``RPROTEN`` and ``WPROTEN``.

After that we need to specify which IDs we are going to allow. For this, we need to 
understand how ID specification works. By using ``RIDA0`` / ``RIDB0`` and ``RIDMSKA0`` / 
``RIDMSKB0``, we can set which bus master IDs can bypass the protection.

As we can understand from register names, SMPU uses two "protection units" (A and B) for
ID matching. Each unit performs a masked comparison with the incoming transaction ID. The 
operation is basically having a logical AND operation with IDs and masks. There is also a
register to invert the result of this match, allowing us to decide which IDs are NOT allowed.

Bus Master IDs
-----------------

> Each bus master (processor core, DMA controller, peripheral) has a unique ID.

Reviewer: The list of bus masters is repeated from above, but slightly different. Probably worth just listing once

The SMPU uses these IDs to control access. Example of entries from SC59x can be seen below.

> **Example: Common SC59x Bus Master IDs**

Reviewer: What does "common" mean here? What is not common? And why is the ARM not listed?

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 30 40

   * - Master
     - ID (binary)
     - Description
   * - SHARC+ 0 Data Port

>      - 0xxxx00001001

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - ``0xxxx00001001``
```

Reviewer: Perhaps use a `0b` prefix

     - Core 0 data accesses
   * - SHARC+ 0 Instruction
     - 0000001000111
     - Core 0 instruction fetches
   * - SHARC+ 1 Data Port
     - 0xxxx00011001
     - Core 1 data accesses
   * - SHARC+ 1 Instruction
     - 0000001010111
     - Core 1 instruction fetches

> Note: 'x' means the bit can be 0 or 1 (use mask to match groups)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: ``x`` means the bit can be 0 or 1 (use mask to match groups)
```

For SC57x and SC58x, we can check Hardware Reference Manual to see System Controller IDs table.

Memory Region Sizes
----------------------

SMPU allows us to set region size between 4KB and 4GB. Each size has an address aligment requirement.
If the address is not properly aligned, the SMPU will mask the lower bits. It may end up with
potentially protecting a different region than intended. Some of the valid region sizes and their
alignment requirements can be seen below.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 20 60

   * - Size
     - SIZE Value
     - Address Alignment
   * - 4 KB
     - 0

>      - Multiple of 4 KB (0xXXXXX000)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Multiple of 4 KB (``0xXXXXX000``)
```

   * - 8 KB
     - 1
     - Specific values only (0, 0x2000, 0x4000, etc.)
   * - 1 MB
     - 8
     - Multiple of 1 MB (0xXXX00000)
   * - 2 MB
     - 9
     - Specific values only
   * - 4 MB
     - 10
     - Multiple of 4 MB (0xXXX00000)
   * - 8 MB - 4 GB
     - 11-20
     - See Hardware Reference Manual for details.

Configuring Security
-----------------------

Global Security Settings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We can control whether secure/non-secure transactions are allowed by writing to
``SMPU_SECURECTL`` register. As default, only secure transactions are allowed.

> To also support non-secure transactions, we can set ``WNSEN`` and ``RNSEN`` bits.

Reviewer: Does secure refer to secure world?

Per-Region Security
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> We can also configure security for individual regions by writing to ``SMPU_SECURERCTL[n]``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can also configure the security for individual regions by writing to ``SMPU_SECURERCTL[n]``
```

> register. It simply exist of 4 different bits, each one belongs to either read/write for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
register. Each of the 4 bits within the register each belong to either read/write for
```

Each bit corresponds to a region?

secure/non-secure accesses.

Read Speculation
-------------------

The SMPU can forward read requests to memory before checking permissions,
saving one clock cycle. However, this may cause side effects for memory-mapped
registers that change state when read (like FIFOs that auto-clear). This is controlled
by ``RSDIS`` bit in ``SMPU_CTL`` register. When protecting memory-mapped FIFOs or other
auto-clearing memory, always disable read speculation to prevent unintended side effects.

Error Handling
-----------------

Interrupts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> We can configure the SMPU to generate interrupts. This is controlled under ``SMPU_CTL``

Reviewer: Controlled by the X bit in the Y register

> register as ``PINTEN`` bit. After setting this bit, we can examine ``SMPU_IADDR`` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
register as ``PINTEN`` bit. After setting this bit, we can examine the ``SMPU_IADDR`` and
```

> ``SMPU_IDTLS`` register to see the details of the violation. Detailed instructions on how

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``SMPU_IDTLS`` registers to see the details of the violation. Detailed instructions on how
```

we can handle interrupts can be examined in Hardware Reference Manual.

Bus Errors
~~~~~~~~~~

> Bus errors are enabled as default. We can disable them by setting ``PBEDIS`` bit under ``SMPU_CTL``.

Reviewer: ... setting **the** X bit **in the** Y register.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 70

   * - Register
     - Purpose
   * - ``SMPU_CTL``
     - Control: Lock, interrupts, bus errors, read speculation
   * - ``SMPU_STAT``
     - Status: Interrupts, errors, overruns
   * - ``SMPU_RADDR[n]``
     - Region base address (bits 31:12)
   * - ``SMPU_RCTL[n]``
     - Region control: Size, enable, read/write protection, ID invert
   * - ``SMPU_RIDA[n]``
     - Region ID A for matching
   * - ``SMPU_RIDB[n]``
     - Region ID B for matching
   * - ``SMPU_RIDMSKA[n]``
     - Mask for ID A matching
   * - ``SMPU_RIDMSKB[n]``
     - Mask for ID B matching
   * - ``SMPU_SECURECTL``
     - Security control: Global secure/non-secure enable
   * - ``SMPU_SECURERCTL[n]``
     - Per-region security configuration
   * - ``SMPU_IADDR``
     - Address that caused last interrupt
   * - ``SMPU_IDTLS``
     - Interrupt details: ID, read/write, secure
   * - ``SMPU_BADDR``
     - Address that caused last bus error
   * - ``SMPU_BDTLS``
     - Bus error details: ID, read/write, secure

Important Notes
------------------

- When using SMPU with cached memory, be careful about write-only regions (cache-back might fail).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- Make sure you're configuring the right SMPU instance for the memory path

>   you want to protect. L2 memory has multiple SMPU instances!

Reviewer: Perhaps worth mentioning in the instances section rather than here? I wouldn't depend on folks reading the whole document. I would add these points to the corresponding section.

- An overly permissive mask might allow more IDs than intended. Always verify
  your mask matches only the intended IDs.

- After reset, only secure transactions are allowed. If you're running non-secure
  code, you must enable non-secure transactions or you'll be blocked.

- Don't enable protection on memory regions that are actively being used by
  code or data. You'll immediately get violations.

- The SMPU will mask misaligned addresses. Always verify alignment to prevent
  protecting the wrong memory range.

Current Linux Support Status
--------------------------------

> SMPU driver support is currently under development for the ADSP Linux kernel

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SMPU Linux support is currently under development

(`PR #3339 <https://github.com/analogdevicesinc/linux/pull/3339>`_).

The ADI DSP Linux kernel and accompanying examples are designed with the intent
that the ARM core owns and allocates most of the system's peripherals.
The accompanying SHARC examples leverage peripherals minimally to prevent
contention with the ARM for system resources.

> Systems where SHARC cores boot their own applications prior to Linux/ARM will

Reviewer: I wouldn't acknowledge this as a valid use case. Just say that loading a SHARC application before Linux is run on the ARMs is not supported. You don't need to explain how do manage it in that use case since it isn't supported.

not be supported due to contention with Linux for system resources
(peripherals, interrupts, DMA, shared L2 memory, etc.). For these systems,
system resources must be carefully managed by the developer to avoid conflicts
with the understanding that Linux/ARM will own the SMPU configuration
and all system resources allocated in the devicetree.

See Also
------------

- :doc:`spu` for peripheral protection
- :doc:`system-protection` for overview of protection features
- Hardware Reference Manual Chapter for complete SMPU documentation and system security overview

> - Silicon Anomaly 20000003 for known SMPU limitations

Reviewer: Add a link
